Vice President Johnson, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chief Justice. President Eisenhower,
Vice President Nixon, President Truman, Reverend Clergy, fellow citizens: We
observe today not a victory of party but a celebration of freedom, symbolizing
an end as well as a beginning, signifying renewal as well as change. For I have
sworn before you and Almighty God the same solemn oath our forebears prescribed
nearly a century and three quarters ago. The world is very different now. For
man holds in his mortal hands the power to abolish all forms of human poverty
and all forms of human life. And yet the same revolutionary beliefs for which
our forebears fought are still at issue around the globe: the belief that the
rights of man come not from the generosity of the state but from the hand of
God.

We dare not forget today that we are the heirs of that first revolution. Let
the word go forth from this time and place, to friend and foe alike, that the
torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans: born in this century,
tempered by war, disciplined by a hard and bitter peace, proud of our ancient
heritage, and unwilling to witness or permit the slow undoing of those human
rights to which this nation has always been committed, and to which we are
committed today at home and around the world. Let every nation know, whether it
wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any
hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe to assure the survival and the
success of liberty. This much we pledge and more

Let both sides seek to invoke the wonders of science instead of its terrors.
Together let us explore the stars, conquer the deserts, eradicate disease, tap
the ocean depths and encourage the arts and commerce. Let both sides unite to
heed in all corners of the earth the command of Isaiah: to "undo the heavy
burdens... and let the oppressed go free." And if a beachhead of cooperation
may push back the jungle of suspicion, let both sides join in creating a new
endeavor, not a new balance of power, but a new world of law, where the strong
are just and the weak secure and the peace preserved. All this will not be
finished in the first one hundred days. Nor will it be finished in the first
one thousand days, nor in the life of this Administration, nor even perhaps in
our lifetime on this planet. But let us begin.

Now the trumpet summons us again not as a call to bear arms, though arms we
need, not as a call to battle, though embattled we are, but a call to bear the
burden of a long twilight struggle, year in and year out, "rejoicing in hope,
patient in tribulation"-a struggle against the common enemies of man: tyranny,
poverty, disease and war itself. Can we forge against these enemies a grand and
global alliance, North and South, East and West, that can assure a more
fruitful life for all mankind? Will you join in that historic effort? In the
long history of the world, only a few generations have been granted the role of
defending freedom in its hour of maximum danger. I do not shrink from this
responsibility-I welcome it. I do not believe that any of us would exchange
places with any other people or any other generation. The energy, the faith,
the devotion which we bring to this endeavor will light our country and all who
serve it, and the glow from that fire can truly light the world

And so, my fellow Americans, ask not what your country can do for you: ask what
you can do for your country. My fellow citizens of the world, ask not what
America will do for you, but what together we can do for the freedom of man.
Finally, whether you are citizens of America or citizens of the world, ask of
us here the same high standards of strength and sacrifice which we ask of you.
With a good conscience our only sure reward, with history the final judge of
our deeds, let us go forth to lead the land we love, asking His blessing and
His help, but knowing that here on earth God's work must truly be our own.
