Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of Congress, fellow Americans:
Fifty-one years ago. John F. Kennedy declared to this chamber that "the
Constitution makes us not rivals for power but partners for progress." "It is
my task," he said, "to report the State of the Union-to improve it is the task
of us all." Tonight, thanks to the grit and determination of the American
people, there is much progress to report. After a decade of grinding war, our
brave men and women in uniform are coming home. After years of grueling
recession, our businesses have created over six million new jobs. We buy more
American cars than we have in five years, and less foreign oil than we have in
20. Our housing market is healing, our stock market is rebounding, and
consumers, patients, and homeowners enjoy stronger protections than ever
before. So, together, we have cleared away the rubble of crisis, and we can say
with renewed confidence that the State of our Union is stronger.

But we gather here knowing that there are millions of Americans whose hard work
and dedication have not yet been rewarded. Our economy is adding jobs, but too
many people still can't find full-time employment. Corporate profits have
skyrocketed to all-time highs, but for more than a decade, wages and incomes
have barely budged. It is our generation's task, then, to reignite the true
engine of America's economic growth: a rising, thriving middle class. It is our
unfinished task to restore the basic bargain that built this country: the idea
that if you work hard and meet your responsibilities. you can get ahead, no
matter where you come from, no matter what you look like, or who you love. It
is our unfinished task to make sure that this government works on behalf of the
many and not just the few: that it encourages free enterprise, rewards
individual initiative, and opens the doors of opportunity to every child across
this great nation.

The American people don't expect government to solve every problem. They don't
expect those of us in this chamber to agree on every issue. But they do expect
us to put the nation's interests before party. They do expect us to forge
reasonable compromise where we can. For they know that America moves forward
only when we do so together. and that the responsibility of improving this
union remains the task of us all. Our work must begin by making some basic
decisions about our budget: decisions that will have a huge impact on the
strength of our recovery. Over the last few years, both parties have worked
together to reduce the deficit by more than 2.5 dollars trillion, mostly
through spending cuts, but also by raising tax rates on the wealthiest I
percent of Americans. As a result, we are more than halfway towards the goal of
4 dollars trillion in deficit reduction that economists say we need to
stabilize our finances. Now we need to finish the job. And the question is,
how?

Our first priority is making America a magnet for new jobs and manufacturing.
After shedding jobs for more than 10 years, our manufacturers have added about
500,000 jobs over the past three. Caterpillar is bringing jobs back from Japan.
Ford is bringing jobs back from Mexico. And this year. Apple will start making
Macs in America again. There are things we can do, right now. to accelerate
this trend. Last year, we created our first manufacturing innovation institute
in Youngstown, Ohio. A once-shuttered warehouse is now a state-of-the-art lab
where new workers are mastering the 3D printing that has the potential to
revolutionize the way we make almost everything. There's no reason this can
happen in other towns.

We should follow the example of a North Miami woman named Desiline Victor. When
Desiline arrived at her polling place, she was told the wait to vote might be
six hours. And as time ticked by, her concern was not with her tired body or
aching feet, but whether folks like her would get to have their say. And hour
after hour, a throng of people stayed in line to support her-because Desiline
is 102 years old. And they erupted in cheers when she finally put on a sticker
that read, "I voted." Here's Desiline. We should follow the example of a police
officer named Brian Murphy. When a gunman opened fire on a Sikh temple in
Wisconsin, Brian was the first to arrive and he did not consider his own
safety. He fought back until help arrived and ordered his fellow officers to
protect the safety of the fellow Americans worshiping inside, even as he lay
bleeding from 12 bullet wounds. And when asked how he did that, Brian said,
"That's just the way we're made."
